--- Page 1 ---
16 
Strategy as a Profession for Future Generations 
Andrew 11V. Marshall 

A Visit to Chartres and Jouy 
One of Albert Wohlstelter's distinctive characlerislics has alway been his search 
for the absolule best of whatever is available. This has been true of everything: 
people, technical advice, furniture, medical care, and, perhaps most importantlt, 
food. In the mid-1950s, travel to Europe increased for many people at RAND. 
In the fall of 1956 my wife and I were in Paris at the same time as the 
Wohlstetters-Albert, Roberta, mul Joanie. Harvey DeWeerd was also there. Early 
one Sunday morning the six of us went off to see the cathedral al Chartres in 
a cnr Albert had rented. Albert had also noticed there was a one-star restauraril 
near by, in the small town of Jouy. He telephoned lo reserve a table. 
It was unusually cold for November and, of course, the church was unheated. 
His enthusiasm and tutelage were unbounded while we muttered quietly and 
froze. Nol a tympanum, portal, window, or earning went unnoted, inside or out. 
Finally we drove off lo Jouy-ravenous and shivering. It was the first occasion 
for my wife and me to experience the wonderful French custom of a splendid 
Sunday midday meal. Our expectations were high-and were realized! A charming 
rustic inn, with gleaming copper pans hanging in an open kitchen. The ebullient 
patron and his wife all smiles and welcoming bon jours, a beaming presence 
in a room full of warmth and appetizing odors. 
I cannot remember the entire meal, but its main features were two roast pheasants with appropriate garnishment and an excellent raspberry souffie. Both 
the cathedral and the meal were memorable and excellent. We owe that to Albert 
and his effort to make the most of every occasion. 
How does one become a strategic thinker? What sort of training 

302

--- Page 2 ---
Strategy as a Profession  

or apprenticeship is useful? What's a strategist? These are all difficult 
questions. For one thing there are problems of defining strategic thinkings, 
or what strategy is. These definitional problems seem to be intractable, 
and to some extent it may a matter of recognizing strategic thinking 
when one see it. But, in general, strategy as contrasted to tactics deals 
with the coordination of activities at the higher levels of organizations. 
Strategy also focuses on longer-term goals and reflects a cast of mind 
that focuses on shaping the future rather than simply reacting to it. 
Our vocabulary and use of words in these areas are seldom precise 
or accurate. The word strategy tends to be used in many way . In 
particular I would note that in the national security area, which is 
the main focus of this piece, there is a constant tendency to think of 
military strategy as related principally to the application of resources 
in a possible future war and the general guidance for more detailed 
planning for specific contingencies. The result is that there is relatively 
little discussion of strategies for the peacetime management of our 
militaTy organizations and for the allocation of resources over time so 
as to develop more efficient, effective, competitive military forces with 
appropriate doctrines and concepts of operations. Given the existence 
of nuclear weapons, the highest priority objective for the United States 
has been deterrence of large-scale war. In this we have been largely 
successful. Therefore, the strategic management problem in our national 
security establishment has been the peacetime competition to preserve 
and indeed enhance in the future our ability to deter the Soviet Union 
from actions adverse to our interests. Now even this definition of our 
priority objective may need serious amendment as we move into a 
more truly multipolar world. . 
It is clear that some people seem more readily able to address issues 
of strategy or the strategic management of our national security efforts. 
They have a willingness and a self-confidence to address larger, more 
basic issues than do others. They often appear to bring a very different 
perspective to the discussion of the issues of what our strategy ought 
to he. How do they get this way? What sort of traning 1s useful? This 
is what I want to address in the next two sections. 

What Environments Produce Strategists? 
This is a question that deserves extensive study. All 1 can do is 
draw upon my einxpenence  and observations of the environment at 
the RAND Corporation in the 1950s and early l960s and my later experience in government in the period 1972 to the present. One 
disadvantage of focusing on RAND as a producer of strategist is that 
it clearly biases the discussion toward an analy51s of developmemt
. . ·  
--- Page 3 ---
304 Andrew W. Marshall 
of people whose role has been advisers in the sense that Herb Goldhamer 
treated in his book, The Adviser. There are other routes to being a 
strategist, including those who reach high positions in the military 
services or enter government service from other career lines such as 
the law or investment banking. But the case of RAND is perhaps of 
special interest because it did provide in the 1950s and early 1960 
an environment that produced a number of people who are now 
aknowledged as major strategic thinkers. 

The RAND Experience 

There was something special about the RAND environmemt from 
the late 1940s through most of the 1960s. For one thing, especially in 
the late 1940s and the 1950s, there was a sense of being on the leading 
edge , of dealing with the centrally important problems. The invention 
of nuclear weapons and several other technology developmencs at the 
end of World War II produced a situation that was quite new, one in 
which the issue of what our strategy should be was extremely important. 
Another aspect of this situation, given the large increase in destructive 
power nuclear weapons introduced, was that there were no experts. Two 
small weapons had been used at the very end of World War II; what 
larger numbers of weapons might do to change the nature of war was 
unclear. Nobel prize winners were no better than graduate student in 
thinking about the relevant issues, and at meetings and working groups 
at RAND in the early days there was no hierarchy. This was an ideal 
situation for younger people (the average age of the professional staff 
at RAND in 1950 was about twenty-eight), who were immediately treated 
as equals and valued for what they could contribute to the discussions. 
This is a rare situation, certainly not characteristic of a academia or 
normal organizations, and it led to the rapid development of individuals 
who were willing to address the broadest issues of national security. 
There was also a sense of having a preferred position with respect to 
access to information on the new developmenls taking place in weaponry, 
in particular in the design of nuclear weapons, their delivery systems, 
and other relevant technology.
Two other things favored the development of strategic thinking and 
innovation at RAND. On was the freedom RAND had to select the 
problems and the issue on which it worked. This is very different 
from the environment in contract studies organizations, especially now. 
The other wa the presence of several remarkable men who set the 
intellectual tone and style of much of the broader analysis that began 
in the early 1950s. Two l would name are Charles Hitch and John 
Williams, the heads respectively of the Economics and the Mathematics

--- Page 4 ---
Strategy as a Profession 305 

Division. Apart from their own intellectual contributions their insterest 
in the cult1vat1on of full-ranging discussion, their intellectual fairness, 
and their interest in the development of younger people and of new 
method of analysis all favored innovation. 
One of the interesting things that happened at RAND was the 
success of the economists in assuming a leading role in the direction 
or a number of important studies and, more generally, in shaping the 
way in which RAND addressed national security issues. Initially the 
economists were brought into what had been largely a technological 
organization to deal wtth what was called the military worth function. 
It had become clear to the technical people that they needed some 
assistance in thinking about the oojectives that military weapon systems 
were to achieve. There was also some interest in the economics of 
defense, especially as it dealt with issue of mobilization, and in the 
targeting of an opponent's industrial capacity and assessing damage 
to industrial societies from strategic bombing. The economists soon 
played a much larger and more central role in managing and directing 
a number of the successful studie . Why was this? 
Herman Kahn and I used to discuss chis puzzle. We had a number of hypotheses. For one thing the economics or the situation, broadlf conceived, were important. Whal things cost, the le,,el of resource that nations are able to devote to defen5e over an extended period-th se all shape one's views as to che kinds of weapon systems that are desirable and feasible. But another advantage the economists had was that they knew from their own experience that experts could be wrong. Indeed, they a.Isa knew that much discu5sion of economic ~roblems is foolish and that many widely held views, even among resp ns1ble people, are faulty. The experience or engineers and physicists i d!fferent. In those field there are real ex.perts who are much more hkely to be i-ight than are others. Economists. therefor , were more intellectually comfortable in the situation hat existed with respect to nuclear warfare, in which there were no exp res. One of the people in the economics department who was the fir5l to lead and manage a large RAND stud)' wa Al~ert WohlSletter. Beginning in the early 1950s, he examined a set of issues connected with the basing of long-range bombers. The res1Jlt of that 'tudy a.re di cussed lsewhere jn this book. 1 want to note vhat seems to me . . . . • . Alberl made in the conduct one of the maJor innovations or mvenuons f . ND d' th practice had been o that stud . In prevtous large RA stu ies, . . prorrr.:ims at the very to lay out a number of a.lcernauve ystems or o· -·· . h" h . . lf fi d on evaluatmg w ,c beginning of the study. The study 11 e ocuse . of the alternati e systems was the most cost-effective.

--- Page 5 ---
;06 Andrew lV. Marshall Alb rt's approach was different. He started with a few alternative to the existing plan or program, but as the study went on he evolved improved alternatives. He was also le~s ri_gjd than .had been the practice in sening down the criteria, the objective functions, the measures of effectivenes at the beginning of the stud and imply s icking with them. Hise olutionar appr ach developed additional criteria and tests of performance as more understanding of the pr blems and the issues emerged. This was, in my judgment, a crucial invention for doing these kinds of studies, becau e one would learn much more abou the nature of the issues and the problems. how one ought lo look at them, and what criteria were rel vant as one went further along in the studies. Also, this way of conducting the analysis had the advantage of inventing additional and better alternatives to examin as one went along. Another aspect of Lhe ituation al RA D that was exceptio11ally favorable to strategic thinking and inn vati n during the early period wa:; the practice of inviting first-rate people to come and spend the summer. This created an environment in which the important thing was to try to tap into the very best talent in the whole country. The objective was not to do the best that RA D could do with it.s exi ting staff, but in a sen to do an analysis that was the best that the cotmtry as a 1-.•hole could accomplish. By its very natur , any organization is limited in the amount and variety of talent, backgrounds, and insights that it can include among its staff. This attitude of searching for the very best people and drawing on the best talent is a key to excellence in broad thinking about any problem or issue. Unfortunately, most organization do not operate thi way. There is perhaps a natural history to most organizations. When they are first formed they are fo used on a. mission, they recruit people who are enthusiastic and who devote themselves to the goals of th organization. As time goes on the organization becomes less flexible, accumulates some deadwood, and has some difficulty in sustaining the original vitality. Organizations ometimes are formed in especially suitable environments that allow them to Houri h for a time. hen the external environment changes and the organization declin s in vitality. In any case, the RAND of the 1950s and early l960s as a remarkable place, both for the talent it recruited and for its atmospher and intellectual dynamic. It wa also remarkabl for its boldn in addressing broader que tion of strategy. It is, th refore, not surprising that some interesting and influential people dev loped there. The U.S. Government . The next experience tbat is perhaps relevant comes from my time in government. Beginning in the middle 1970 , I was involved in

--- Page 6 ---
Strategy as a Profession )07 auempts to initiate strategic planning activities in th~ D . d · ·h d' · . · eparcment of Defense an m t e 1rect1on of some strategic plann·n·g . • I · · 1 experiments. In particu ar, James Roche, then a navy command d 1 · . . er, an wrote several papers dunng 1975-1976 to promote strategic thinking in the Defense Department. We also spomored contractor resear"h 0,.. f · I · .. "some aspects o strategic p annmg. This. experience led me to believe th · while systems analysis ~ad been a liberating force during its ea~~ de_vel~pment, by the middle 1970s it had become a constraint on think mg strategically. People who were systems analyst.s found it difficu.lt to address the sorts of questions chat we felt needed t.o be considered in strategic planning. People with a business background or a com-bination of bus!ness school and mi!itary service seemed to be among the best at taking up and addressing the questions we wanted dealt with. We saw it as a vaccination problem: some backgrounds promoted strategic thinking and others seemed to innoculate people against it. Why is that? To some extent, the systems analysts had by that time developed routine approaches to analysis and perhaps had ceased paying sufficient attention to the complex consequences of acquiring the systems they dealt with. James Schlesinger made a comment to me a number of years ago that systems analysis proceeds by trivializing the mea-surement of effectiveness while perfecting the analysis and the estimate of costs. Programmatic actions, the acquisition of particular weapon systems, the adoption of a new concept of operations, or the setting of new objectives for military forces have complex consequences, including their effects upon the beliefs, actions, and resource allocation patterns of the potential opponents. Most of these consequences are not usually considered in the standard kinds. of analysis. One result is that the top leadership of the Department of Defense ofte~ gets remarkably little assistance from their staffs when truly strategic de-cisions are addressed. This is because the focus of the work of the staffs, the criteria they use, and their measures of effectiveness_ ~re too narrow to account for the considerations that top-level dec1s1on makers in fact want to consider, are concerned with, and take imo account as best they can. Some decisions have larger and different consequences than others. For example, a decision to pursue or create a major strategic _defense capability is different from a decision among several alternat~,•e pro-grams for the next generation of fighter aircraft. The f~r~er mv?lves going into a new business for the U.S. military (although it_ 15 a bu~mess . • · f an exisung business. we once were m), the latter the contmuauon o . Different issues are involved, different forms of analy5Ls seem "~?ed, . . d t tLe. two types of dec1s1ons but ex1sting analysis methods ten to trea u

--- Page 7 ---
308 Andrew W. Marslial/ the same way. Part of the problem may be that much if not all of the existing analysis methodology was developed to assist in procurement or operational-planning decisions. Other m thod of analysis are nec-essary when the questions are more like: What busine·. es should I b in? Where are my competitive advantages? On advantage people from the business world or busines schools may have is 1hac they are used to addressing thes kinds of que1>tions, though often with analysi method that are le s systematic. What Backgrounds and Experiences Are Conducive to Strategic Thinking? There is no specific set of disciplines that mus£ b mastered to be a strategi t. Peopl who think strategically come from a number of different backgrounds. Among tho whom I have met and feel that 1 know personally the best academic backgrounds seem to be onomics, bu ine s chool, applied technology (especially for those who have been in the bu iness world), and in som ase political cience. But what se ms to b central is a ca t of mind that is questioning, eclectic, able LO devise the broadest kind of issues and goals, and able to formulal appropriate ways of achieving these goal . A high tolerance for tll uncertainty that necessarily accompanies any effort co think forward fnre, ten, or twenty years is required. For many people, some period of intense in ·olvement in an imponant, large-scale project or merprise has proved to be crucial. World War JI was such an experience for a number of people and, indeed, there may be a gen rational factor at work: living in interesting limes may contribute to being a good trategist. People wtio were involved-even if only in staff positions or on the peripheries-in ome maj r decision-making body connected with that war had a special quality about them. Experi nces in World War II cleuly had a ignificanl impact on a number of the people who were at RAND during the 1950s. B cause they cont ined m.any people with World War II ex-perience the Truman and Eisenh wer administrations had a character to them that favored strategic thinking. Thi characteristic of admin-istrations has gradually eroded ·ince the I.ate 1950s. The changes that we now se in the ecurity environment of the United States will force another major effort of rethinking our situa ion, our goaL, and our strategies. lt might, th refore, be a period in which a g nera~ion of strategic Lhinkers will emerge as a result of the-cnt1cal experiences they will go through in the next de ade. !~rning_to the question of what kind of academic study or professional trammg might be useful, I would start with economics and business

--- Page 8 ---
Strattgy as o Profession 309 school training, pecially busine s school that have st . . rong programs in business policy and strategy. My recommendation abo . . ut economics is, however, a guarded on . Since the 1940s and 1950 • . . s, economics training has become too mathematical too focus d on the . · · · . . · • acqu1m1on of par11cular a_nalyttc tools that are not, in fact, or mu h use in the national security area. S mething like the fir t course in graduate school ma be enough. They are important, how ver, because people who do not have a sense of macroeconomics and the fundamemal trad -offs that soci ti_es h_ave _ to make find it difficult to think clearly about the long-term 1mpl_1cauons of devoting large, possibly exce sive, percentages of gros nauonal pr ducts (G Ps) to mihtar use . The current stat of the Soviet nion i in some part the result of decades of a heavy military burden with perhaps on the order of 25 to 50 percent of G P devoted to the military and the external empire. In the early 19 0 , when the first initiatives were taken within the Defen e Department to encourage appli ation of a set of ideas that later w re labeled a competitive strategi , I had a discussion with the chief of one of the military services. His reaction to the idea of designing some military programs so as to impose increased costs upon the Soviets was negative, or at least cautious. He had two arguments against focu ing on increasing Soviet costs or expenditures. The first was that the (')viets would simply pend the extra money, there were no reasons for them not to do so; the second was that our own budg ts fluctuate so much that it was unwi e to stimulate a competition which we ourselves might not sustain. The econd of these arguments has real m rit to it. The firs! shows an unawareness of the long-term consequences for the Soviet of high levels of militaq' expenditures or of possible trade-offs between individual program the Sovieu; might be compelled to make, since resources always are limited, . Another virtue of economics training, or for that matter busm s-school training, is that a modest amount of mathematics is ac~~ired, as is some sense of the importance of te hnology and _an ~bihty t? interact more effectively with technologist and hard s~1~m1st~. T_his was one of the advantages the economi ts had over _the palmcal sc_ienll ts at RA D in the early 1950 : quantitative analysis ~v~s som~thmg the economi ts were used to and lheir interest in or ability to di cuss and understand what the technologists were up to was omewhat better than that of the political sci ntists. . . h d ch more attention Demography 1s another area t at e.serv mu h than it has had in the past in the development of 5°'.1t gy. . le I . . 1-• l d mi'Jitary behavior 1s hke Y re auonsh1p of demography to po lllCa an . ph , (0 be an area of increased importance and attention. De~ogra Ir IS . . . f d broad national po icy, often brought into d1scuss1ons o strategy an

--- Page 9 ---
JJO Andrew W Marshall but in only the most obvious and limited ways. William McNeill r cently wrote a small volume adde ing some of the broader relationships of demography to political behavior.2 As in other of his works, he provides a number of hypotheses and ketche out areas that de erve considerably more attention. Additional fields of intere t are cultural anthropology, ethology, and some areas of psychology. In some ways a new und rstanding of man is emerging, based on tudy of the evolution of man and human society and on new analy es of the biology of man, in particular th fonctioning ofth brain. How men proces information, make decisions, and behav are central issue on which much new knowledge exists and more will be available in the future. But above all, if I had a suggotion to make, il would be that peopl study, in any case at least read, hisrory of all kinds: military history, of course, but also economic and technological history. The history or analysis of past wars is a major antidote to the narrow focus of man existing m thod of analysis o( d fense issues. Most discussion of strategy and defen e programs is, if anything, too focu ed on technology and weaponry and not enough on the other factors that ofren dominate actual •.-.-arfare. Also, if on considers the xtended competition between states such as Rome and Carthage, the issue of why the Romttn won in the end may shed interesting light on the key variables that need to be considered in our conceptions of strategy. Anoth r thing that i_§ of great importance is to understand the differences in the ways in which other nations are likely to perceive situations and react to them. pecialized studi . of the strategic culture of the Soviet Union, China, India, Japan, and the European nations are of great us . Some of this can be gained by reading the history of these nations, especially the development of their military and other national se<:urit organizations. Other aspects relate co the particular cultural characteristics of these societies. The Future of trategy We are at a major turning point in the hi tory of the world. A new structure is emerging, a more multipolar world with more complex alliance arrangements. Technology is likely to change the nature of warfare, much as it did in the period of the 1920s and 1930s. Then the development of naval aircraft and aircraft carriers revolutionized war at sea; on land the development of the tank and rugged, portable radios led to the invention of the panzer division and new concepts of operations that changed the nature of theater warfare; and, of course, there was the development of tactical and strate1Zic air forces.

--- Page 10 ---
Strategy as a Projessiori 311 New wea~ons required th~ develop':1~nt of new doctrines, new concepts of operauons, and new kmds of m1htary organizations to exploit fully the new techn_ology .. 1:fow we are to maintain the U.S. military and national security position over the course of the next twenty years is a central issue that will have to be addressed. What our strategy should be for the more complex competition that is emerging will require consideration of many aspects of the changing security environment and changing technology. We will need to know much more than we now do about the emerging regional powers, as well as about the likely major actors, their strategic orientation, their strengths, and their weaknesses. It is to be hoped that new centers of strategic thought and innovation will arise and a new generation of strategists and military innovators will develop to deal with these problems. Notes ). Herbert Goldhamer, The Advi5ers (New York: Elsevier, 1978). 2. William H. McNeill. Pop-ulaJio11 and Politics Since 1750 (Charlottesville, Va.: University Press of Virginia, 1990).

