--- Page 1 ---
JCSS
jaffee center for strategic studies

Eliot A. Cohen

Net Assessment:
An American Approach

JCSS Memorandum no. 29 - April 1990

JCSS TELAVIV UNIVE


--- Page 2 ---
Net Assessment: An American Approach

Dr. Eliot A. Cohen
Lynde and Harry Bradley Senior Research Associate
John M. Olin Institute for Strategic Studies
Harvard University Center for International Affairs

Copyright 1990 Eliot A. Cohen


--- Page 3 ---
Introductory Notes

The following paper is based on a lecture presented at the
Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies on August 17, 1989. At that
time the author was a Visiting Fellow at the Center, as well as
the Bradley Senior Research Associate at Harvard's Olin Institute
for Strategic Studies.

Mr. Andrew W. Marshall is the pioneer of American net
assessment, and the author's debt to him is very great. However,
the views expressed herein are the views of the author only, and
not necessarily those of any other individual or governmental
organization, including the Office of Net Assessment/Office of
the Secretary of Defense.

In what follows, "net assessment" and "net assessors" refer
to ideal types, and not necessarily to current American practice.

2


--- Page 4 ---
Introductory Notes

The following paper is based on a lecture presented at the
Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies on August 17, 1989. At that
time the author was a Visiting Fellow at the Center, as well as
the Bradley Senior Research Associate at Harvard's Olin Institute
for Strategic Studies.

Mr. Andrew W. Marshall is the pioneer of American net
assessment, and the author's debt to him is very great. However,
the views expressed herein are the views of the author only, and
not necessarily those of any other individual or governmental
organization, including the Office of Net Assessment/Office of
the Secretary of Defense.

In what follows, "net assessment" and "net assessors" refer
to ideal types, and not necessarily to current American practice.

2


--- Page 5 ---
Contents

Page no.
Introductory Notes
2
What is Net Assessment?
4
Net Assessment versus "The Estimate of the Situation"
7
Net Assessment versus Systems Analysis

Methodology
9
Attitudes to Numbers
10
Frame of Reference
11
The Central Question
11

A Net Assessment Template

How should we think about the balance?
13
Trends
14
Concepts of Operation
15
Asymmetries
17
Scenarios
18
Practical Problems of Net Assessment

Data
20
Supporting Studies
21
The Organizational Design and Bureaucratic Politics
of Net Assessment
21
Future of Net Assessment
23
Notes
24


--- Page 6 ---
Contents

Page no.
Introductory Notes
2
What is Net Assessment?
4
Net Assessment versus "The Estimate of the Situation"
7
Net Assessment versus Systems Analysis

Methodology
9
Attitudes to Numbers
10
Frame of Reference
11
The Central Question
11

A Net Assessment Template

How should we think about the balance?
13
Trends
14
Concepts of Operation
15
Asymmetries
17
Scenarios
18

Practical Problems of Net Assessment

Data
20
Supporting Studies
21
The Organizational Design and Bureaucratic Politics
of Net Assessment
21
Future of Net Assessment
23
Notes
24


--- Page 7 ---
Here is the transcription of the text from the image:

What is Net Assessment?

What follows represents only one line of thinking about net
assessment, which we may define as "the craft and discipline of
analyzing military balances." From the first part of this
definition an important characteristic of this approach becomes
clear: net assessment, in this view, is not a science or anything
close to it. Although net assessment may draw on various forms
of quantitative analysis, it makes no pretense to the certainty
(such as it is) of operations research, much less the hard
sciences. Many do not share this view, and think that not only
is scientific rigor, of the kind associated, let us say, with
molecular biology, possible in this field, but that scientific
progress characterizes it as well. My view is more pessimistic:
a storehouse of wisdom about doing net assessments has been built
up in the Office of Net Assessment (ONA) in the Office of the
Secretary of Defense, and many statesmen and generals have, in
the past, made superb net assessments. But there is no guarantee
that accumulated good sense will survive in any bureaucracy, and
individual genius appears and flourishes as it wills. What is
worse, many of the approaches to net assessment that dominate
contemporary academe, and to a lesser extent the public and
contract research worlds are, in fact, profoundly destructive of
sound net assessment.

Net assessment is the appraisal of military balances. It
goes on all the time in the minds of decisionmakers and their
staffs. Their implicit beliefs--no matter how inarticulate,
sketchy, inconsistent, or fantastic--about how well they will do
against a given enemy constitute a form of net assessment. But
this paper will deal with explicit, policy-oriented net
assessment. Historians, who have much to contribute to this
field, do a different kind of net assessment: they want to
understand a military balance simply because they want to
understand it, or to relate it to some other intellectual
problem. Strategic net assessment, that is the weighing of
politico-military balances, on the other hand, has this purpose,
but another as well--the raising of problems to the attention of
senior decisionmakers, such as the Secretary of Defense or the
National Security Council. Strategic net assessment is the most
highly aggregated form of the discipline and incorporates the
many other kinds, which are of almost infinite variety.
Comparisons of weapons systems, leadership styles, operational
capabilities in a specific campaign, general technological
development, and SO forth, all feed into strategic net
assessments.

Analysts doing strategic net assessment seek first to
describe the nature of political-military competition in various

4


--- Page 8 ---
geographical and functional areas, under both peace and wartime
conditions. Secondly, they wish to discover or highlight issues
that may not require urgent action, but which do demand the
attention of the most senior government officials in the national
security arena. For those purposes an Office of Net Assessment
has functioned in the Office of the Secretary of Defense since
the early 1970s; since its beginnings it has been under the
directorship of Andrew Marshall.
Marshall, a former senior RAND
analyst who has worked since the mid-1950s for the United States
government on some of the most sensitive intelligence and
strategic issues facing it, is the father of American net
assessment, at least of the kind described and advocated in this
paper.¹

By virtue of his abilities, his personality, and the length
of his tenure in office, Marshall has had a profound impact on at
least two generations of military officers, civil servants,
scholars, and professional researchers. But in addition to the
influence of a uniquely important personality, one should note as
well larger environmental factors which have molded this style.
For the last 40 years the United States has been locked in a
long-term strategic competition with the Soviet Union.
Economically, the Soviet Union has had little chance of matching
the United States and, moreover, has had relatively little
interaction with it. By the 1960s Soviet communism--though not
related strains such as Maoism and Castroism--posed little
ideological threat to the United States, although Marxism-
Leninism formed the Soviet world view and pervaded all
institutions of the Soviet state. For the most part, then, the
superpowers struggled on the strategic, i.e. politico-military
plane. They rarely confronted each other militarily, and then
almost never violently, but they fought proxy wars against each
other, created the world's largest and most durable alliance
systems, and built vast military machines suitable for
conventional or nuclear war, and at a variety of levels of
intensity. American net assessors, therefore, have faced the
task of analyzing forces ranged across the globe appraising the
US-Soviet balance under two conditions: peacetime competition and
potential war, each of which in turn could take a variety of
forms. Clearly the calculations involved were complex. On the
other hand, the United States had the advantage of dealing with a
single opponent, whose fundamental beliefs were well-known and
who placed great weight on formal statements of doctrine. The
bureaucratization of the Soviet Union also made it, in some
measure, a predictable opponent.

The structure of American government and society also
facilitated a distinctive approach to net assessment. For all
the undeniable cumbersomeness and diffusion of power within the
American political system, certain favorable circumstances
facilitated official net assessment of the kind discussed here.
Unlike smaller countries--Israel might be an example--the United
5


--- Page 9 ---
States could afford the human and fiscal resources to invest in
an activity that produced no immediate answers to pressing policy
problems. Not only can the United States staff an organization
like ONA, but it can easily afford the funds for specialized
external research in support of its efforts, and American society
has vast pools of expertise of almost every imaginable kind. The
absence of a single dominant intellectual style in the United
States similarly fed the spirit of eclectic inquiry necessary for
net assessment as described herein.

6


--- Page 10 ---
Net Assessment versus "The Estimate of
the Situation"

Strategic net assessment differs from other kinds of
assessments. It is distinct from the traditional "Commander's
Estimate of the Situation," which is taught to American staff
officers at different ranks. The Estimate of the Situation (or
Commander's Estimate) is designed to provide officers with a
structured means of thinking through a tactical or an operational
situation; as such it merely codifies common sense orderliness.
Composed of five sections, it comprises:

1. The mission (or the problem)

2. The situation and course of action, which includes
analysis of geography and weather, as well as the
friendly and enemy situations

3. Analysis of various possible enemy courses of action

4. Comparison of the merits and defects of one's own
courses of action

5. Decision

A sophisticated and thorough version can be found in a classic of
early twentieth century American military thought, Sound Military
Decision (Newport, Rhode Island: U.S. Naval War College, 1942).

Estimates of the situation can be done with greater or
lesser rigor, and some of the most extensive efforts--for
example, the estimate of the situation done by the US Joint Board
with respect to Japan in 1929--have been models of thoroughness.
But the estimate of the situation, valuable though it may be for
campaign planning, has three drawbacks from the point of view of
net assessment. First, it tends to be formulaic. The
commander's estimate, like the "principles of war," is taught to
officers of varying quality, and at varying levels of command;
its purpose is not to cultivate insight but to make sure that
officers make decisions in an orderly fashion. For that purpose,
a fixed structure is helpful. Strategic net assessments,
however, must retain extreme flexibility of format, for the
structure of a study must often be determined by the substance of
the issues at stake. Elaborate checklists for strategic analysis
may buy comprehensiveness, but they do so at the expense of both
rigidity and, what is worse, a sense of premature closure on
important issues. Particularly at the higher levels of politico-

7


--- Page 11 ---
military competition, where intangible considerations weigh
heavily, a looser structure of analysis is required.

A second drawback of the estimate of the situation lies in
its focus on an immediate military effort, in the form of a
battle or a campaign. In contrast strategic net assessment looks
at a competition, a struggle that may have no clearly defined
beginning or terminus. Finally, the estimate of the situation
focuses on the here and now. Even the 1929 Joint Board study
referred to above looked at conditions and considered forces no
more than two years in either direction from the date of the
study. It is a premise of net assessment, however, that far
longer time horizons, looking both backward and forward, are
necessary.

8


--- Page 12 ---
Net Assessment versus Systems Analysis

Another alternative to net assessment is systems analysis, a
methodology which reached the peak of its bureaucratic power in
the early 1960s when Robert McNamara was America's secretary of
defense.2 It is a mode of thought--a school of strategic
analysis--in its own right, and it continues to exert a powerful
influence over both the academic and the bureaucratic communities
of analysts. Indeed, the Office of Program Analysis and
Evaluation in the Pentagon, now headed by an Assistant Secretary
of Defense, represents the institutionalization of this mode of
analysis. Systems analysis draws on economics and the skills of
operations research (which is considerably more technical and
focused) to answer the needs of decisionmakers about questions of
military sufficiency and force structure design.

To understand the differences between systems analysis and
strategic net assessment we should understand four critical
differences between them.

Methodology

Systems analysts tend to focus on a single preferred
approach to setting up a problem. To be sure, analysts often
have different pet models or measures of effectiveness, but it is
extremely rare to find an individual analyst using several
methodologies. Rather, systems analysts attempt to find the key
method or formula for understanding military balances. For the
most part, they turn to firepower-scoring systems as ways of
making opposing forces comparable to one another. Strategic net
assessment, by way of contrast, is resolutely eclectic. A wise
net assessor will use many methods--including those of systems
analysis, to be sure, but also war gaming, historical analogy
making, and traditional forms of reasoning, such as that embodied
in the great state papers of Winston Churchill as he surveyed the
world scene in December 1942.3

Systems analysis, like much of modern social science, relies
heavily on deduction. That is, it seeks to discover the truth by
reasoning from first principles, and generating short, axiomatic,
and abstract propositions which it then tests (sometimes) against
external reality. Strategic net assessment is more inductive--an
approach in bad odor with some contemporary philosophers of
science, but which has more to be said for it in this field.4
In practice, most scientists interested in discovery rather than
methodology mix induction and deduction, and think rather little
of it.
Another way of putting it is that strategic net
assessment is highly empirical and fact-oriented. Those who
9


--- Page 13 ---
practice it do not search for the best theory, preferring instead
to probe the contours of reality, scanning the data for anomalies
and trends, continuities and oddities. Those who do net
assessment best are more likely to have the skills of the
investigative journalist, the historian, or the old-fashioned
general practitioner, than those of the theoretical physicist,
the game theorist, or the student of modern philosophy.

Systems analysis makes claims to scientific method and
rigor, and ultimately to something approaching scientific
knowledge about military matters. Strategic net assessment, more
modestly, hopes to get a handle on pieces of large, infinitely
complicated, and interconnected problems. Ironically, its
practitioners may be closer to modern science--to the concepts
underlying the mathematics of "chaos," for instance--than the
systems analysts who appear to believe in Newtonian
certainties.5

Attitudes to Numbers

Systems analysis rests heavily on quantitative analyses of
military balances, in part because this seems "scientific." To be
sure, analysts usually begin their studies by acknowledging the
importance of intangibles--particularly political calculations
and what is sometimes called "military judgment." On occasion
they may even list some of the key non-quantifiable issues
involved in a particular estimate. In practice, however, they
then ignore these issues, letting their analyses rest on
unexamined assumptions (with respect to coalition warfare, for
example). Strategic net assessment, by way of contrast, though
it studies various quantitative aspects of military balances,
understands that first order questions must be tackled, even if
the range of answers appears vague or indefinite. One may
illustrate the difference as follows: In the past, for most
systems analysts, the questions of how a NATO/Warsaw Pact war in
Europe might start was of importance chiefly because of the
differential mobilization rates implied. Thus, the range of
issues they investigated concerned merely the lag time between
the mobilization of the two blocs, and how many days after
mobilization a war broke out. A sound strategic net assessment,
however, would treat in extenso the question of why war might
break out as a fundamental problem, for this could shape the
nature of the ensuing conflict. It would, for example, explore
the likely coalitional solidity of the two sides under different
scenarios. And this exploration of intangibles is, as we shall
see, merely a beginning.

10


--- Page 14 ---
Frame of Reference

Most systems analysts, following what they take to be
scientific method, believe in the necessity and desirability of
simplification. Hence, they tend to confine their analyses to
possible campaigns waged in clearly defined areas of the world.
The method, therefore, is analytic in the strict sense, that is,
it seeks understanding by breaking something into its component
parts. In theory, at any rate, if one were to add up a set of
systems analysis campaign studies one would have a picture of
war. Net assessors, by way of contrast, are uncomfortably aware
of the essential arbitrariness of most geographical and other
boundaries used for such studies (e.g., those that look at the
NATO/Warsaw Pact balance on the inter-German border alone,
without looking as well at Austria and Denmark). Some arbitrary
assumptions of this kind are necessary, but they must always come
under scrutiny. Net assessors remind themselves that any
particular study is only a piece of a larger conflict, be it war
or peacetime competition. In Clausewitz's words, in war "more
than elsewhere the part and the whole must always be thought of
together."6
The Central Question

One sees the root of the differences between systems
analysis and net assessment when one looks at the core question
at the heart of the two approaches to weighing military balance.
Systems analysis asks, "How much is enough?" which Alain Enthoven
and K. Wayne Smith appropriately chose as the title for their
book on the subject. This implies (1) that we can know, with
fair precision, how much military force is indeed required in any
situation. This implies that we can measure military power
relatively easily and, again, precisely (2) that we can turn to
analysis for focused answers to immediate policy questions. The
second point illustrates a possible corruption of systems
analysis, which the more careful practitioners of the discipline
understand well: a relentless focus on getting "the answer" to a
particular problem may corrode the integrity of the analysis.
Systems analysts seek to influence day-to-day decisionmaking. As
a result, they put a premium on definite conclusions, in a
business where certainty is intrinsically elusive, and one's
political beliefs and career incentives can skew one's judgment.
Net assessors are not intrinsically more decent people, but they
do ask more open-ended questions: "What is the nature of our
current competition? If war broke out tomorrow, what might it
look like? What issues should policymakers consider as they look
five or ten years ahead?" As a result, they have fewer
incentives to wrap themselves in a cloak of scientific certainty.
These criticisms of the estimate of the situation and of
systems analysis certainly do not mean that either approach is
11


--- Page 15 ---
valueless. Far from it. Net assessment, however, is something
different, although it draws on the best elements of the methods
of both--the comprehensive inventory-taking of the estimate of
the situation, for example, and the thoughtful search for
measures of effectiveness characteristic of good systems
analysis. It should be noted, however, that the three different
approaches are likely to appeal to different kinds of
personalities, and work best in different analytical settings.
We will return to this issue at the end of this paper.

12


--- Page 16 ---
A Net Assessment Template
8
It appears that the Soviets believe in the possibility of a
single, comprehensive net assessment.7 Such a wildly optimistic
view has its roots in Marxist-Leninist claims to understand
society scientifically, and at a time when such claims have shown
themselves almost comically hollow one may doubt them. A more
reasonable path is that taken in the recent annual report of the
Secretary of Defense, which lists two broad kinds of net
assessments. One kind is chiefly geographical: it looks at,
for example, the balance in East Asia, Central Europe, Central
America, and in space. The other is functional: it includes
studies of the maritime, central nuclear, and power-projection
balances. Of course this does not exhaust the list of possible
balance assessments. The balances noted here overlap, and this
should be considered a strength, not an indication of analytical
sloppiness. Forces have more than one use, military competition
in peace and war takes place on different planes and at different
times, and the totality of the US-Soviet competition is so great
that some duplication of study is not a vice, but a cardinal
virtue.

While each of these possible balances must be done in its
own way, five key questions or concepts occur in virtually all:

How should we think about the balance?

This, obviously, is the first and most important of all
questions, to which the answers are rarely evident. This section
of a balance study deals with a range of issues, including such
mundane matters as the physical limits of the area studied, which
may not necessarily coincide with conventional demarcations (for
example, one might study a NATO/Warsaw Pact confrontation with
reference to Swedish and Swiss participation, or overlooking some
of the conventional command boundaries between AFNORTH and
AFCENT). Two particular subsets of issues emerge in this
section. First, what are the politics of the area or subject
under consideration? What objectives do the two (or more, if
there are more) sides have? What constraints born of domestic
politics shape their capabilities and preferred strategies?

Secondly, one must ask which standards of comparison--
"measures of effectiveness," to use the language of operations
research--are the most important. A thoughtful discussion of
which measures to focus on can be almost as useful to a net
assessment as the ensuing analysis that then applies them. Net
assessment differs from systems analysis, in part, because it
requires extensive consideration of measures of effectiveness,

13


--- Page 17 ---
and frequently the use of several such measures side by side.
For example, in comparing the US-Soviet military competition in
space one might look not only at the sophistication of the
respective countries' satellites, but at the launcher throwweight
they possess, the vulnerability of their launch facilities to
various kinds of disruption, and their flexibility in times of
crisis and war. Above all, one would seek to measure the
relative effectiveness of the two sides' space systems not only
with respect to uniform engineering or tactical criteria, but
with respect to operational styles and strategic requirements as
well. When comparing the US and Soviet navies, for example, side
by side comparison of individual ships or even of fleets means
very little without an understanding of what governments desire
those navies to do in wartime.

Trends

Net assessment looks at long-term trends. In particular, it
studies patterns of behavior that go back twenty years, and
sometimes more, and it attempts to look ahead five or ten years.
This is a particularly distinctive feature of American net
assessment, and an extremely important one first, because it
gives decisionmakers a sense of the long-term directions and
impulses which are often submerged in the hurly burly of day-to-
day office routine. When assessors get such fundamental facts
wrong they set themselves up for serious mistakes. Thus, in the
1930s British intelligence agencies first underestimated, than
overestimated the magnitude and pace of the German buildup.
Consequently they induced first complacency, and then excessive
alarm among the Cabinet and the Chiefs of Staff.

Secondly, long-term trend analysis enables one to capture an
extremely important concept: the growth of military stock. If
one country outspends another in key areas by only a slight
margin, the cumulative consequences can nonetheless be
tremendous. In the case of the United States and the Soviet
Union, it became apparent to some in the early 1980s that even
large US defense budgets could not compensate within a couple of
years for the steady edge in Soviet military investment that had
built up over the preceding decade and a half. The conclusion to
be drawn was that it made more sense to invest in weapons systems
and tactical and operational approaches that had high leverage--
i.e., "competitive strategies" that would render obsolete large
portions of the Soviet arsenal, or which would impose
disproportionate costs on the Soviets in the forms of
countermeasures of various kinds.

14


--- Page 18 ---
Concepts of Operation

Different armies fight differently; indeed, even within one
country military organizations may take radically different
approaches to battle (this is true, for instance, of the United
States Army and Marine Corps). Yet this simple fact has rarely
worked its way into large scale comparative assessments of
fighting forces. Net assessment requires thorough understanding
of an opponent's style of warfare, and an effort to see how it
interacts with one's own. In order to get beyond mere "bean
counting"--the tallying up of numbers of tanks, aircraft, and
artillery pieces--it is necessary to understand how each side
characteristically operates its forces, and then to speculate as
intelligently as possible about the significance of those facts.

The obstacles to work of this kind are considerable. After
the Spanish Civil War, for example, French intelligence noticed
that the Wehrmacht had begun to invest in heavy tanks and large
quantities of antitank guns. The French read this to indicate
that the Germans had come around to their views about the role of
the tank in modern warfare, namely, that it could most usefully
serve as a supporting arm to the infantry, but that it could not
be the centerpiece of modern tactics. This was, of course,
hardly the case. A similar case is that of the US Navy as it
gauged its prospective Japanese opponents during the 1930s.
Although the Navy was vaguely aware that the Japanese intended to
fight a series of attritional battles using cruisers and
destroyers operating at night, it failed to detect the
thoroughness of Japanese preparations for that kind of warfare--
the disastrous battle of Savo Island on the night of August 8-9,
1942, which cost the Allies four cruisers (the Japanese lost
none) and a thousand dead, was the result.

To understand an opponent's concept of operations requires
not merely the perusal of his field manuals (although that is
clearly important), but a grasp of the philosophy of war that
animates his approach to battle. It requires as well an
understanding of the culture of his decisionmaking, which is more
difficult to come to terms with than his tactical routines;
indeed, even when one is engaged in battle with an opponent his
fundamental traits may still be elusive.10 Thus, British and
American generals comforted themselves during World War II with
the thought that their German opponents were thorough and
disciplined, but rigid and schematic in their approach to war.
In fact, the Germans were a creative foe, who delegated far more
responsibility to junior officers than did either of the Anglo-
Saxon armies, and such escapades as the invasion of Russia reveal
far more haphazard planning (particularly in the logistical area)
on the part of the military than anyone realized at the time.

If it is dangerous to misgauge an opponent's concept of
operations initially, it is almost as perilous to think it

15


--- Page 19 ---
static. Such a misreading occurred, to some extent, in Israel in
the years before the Yom Kippur War of 1973.11 Although the
general staff of the Israel Defense Forces knew very well indeed
the order of battle of its Arab opponents, the weaponry they had
available and their basic plans, they failed to see how their
enemies' fundamental approach to war had changed, and how old
characteristics (the steadfastness of peasant soldiers fighting a
defensive battle, for example) and new operational planning (e.g.
for a broad frontal assault across the Suez Canal) had created an
entirely new kind of threat.

Net assessors must consider an opponent's concept of
operations in two other ways. First, they must look at how it
interacts with their own organizational routines, preferences,
and decisionmaking culture. This requires a look at the total
picture on both sides, which may be rather less reassuring or
self-flattering than the usual horizontal comparison of
individual pieces of equipment or small units. For example, in
the 1970s and 1980s American defense analysts often painted a
relatively rosy picture of the conventional balance in Europe
because they believed--correctly, it would appear--that American
and West German army units were better trained and equipped, man
for man and battalion for battalion, than their Soviet
counterparts. This was true, but it was only part of the
picture; it did not take into account the Soviet concentration on
the operational level of war, or the measures the Soviets had
taken to compensate for the relative inefficiency of their
smaller units. Net assessors must understand that all military
capabilities are relative: they do not ask whether the enemy is
efficient, in some general sense, at conducting certain kinds of
operations, but how he is likely to do against one's own side.

Perhaps most difficult of all in this part of net assessment
is the attempt to understand how the opponent views the balance--
the other side's net assessment. Such an understanding of the
opposing side's view has a number of uses: it may help assess the
likelihood of war (how does the enemy assess his chances?), of
peacetime trends (does the enemy think he is behind in certain
areas into which he will pour resources?), and finally it serves
as a check on one's own calculations (which may be too rosy or
too grim). Winston Churchill once remarked, "Always remember,
however sure you are that you can easily win, that there would
not be a war if the other man did not think he also had a
chance." All net assessments are provisional, and one might
paraphrase Churchill to say that strategic competition would not
occur if the other side thought its position hopeless; and there
might not be peace if the other side thought it could win the
war.

16


--- Page 20 ---
Here is the transcription of the text from the image:

Asymmetries

To do net assessment properly one must focus on the
fundamental asymmetries between two potential opponents,
including differences of organizational structure, political
purpose, and operational objectives. Some of these differences
are fairly obvious: for example, the United States' Navy's
interest in sea control during a possible war with the Soviet
Union has been fundamentally different from the USSR's interest
in sea denial, which is normally a simpler mission. In the Arab-
Israeli context, there has always been a fundamental asymmetry
between the size and economic resources of the two parties to the
conflict, and this has injected a note of pessimism into Israeli
strategic calculations since the state was created.

An analysis of asymmetries, however, must go beyond crudely
obvious differences of political purpose, economic strength, and
geographical location. In the Arab-Israeli case, for instance,
it was long assumed that time worked on behalf of the Arab
coalition opposed to Israel, when this was, in fact, not the
truth. To be sure, economic growth in countries such as Iraq,
Syria, and Egypt made them far more formidable competitors with
Israel, but other pressures operated as well. The longer the
Arab-Israeli conflict went on, the harder it was for Arab states
to act in accordance with the often-expressed belief that the
very existence of Israel was intolerable. Moreover, time had the
effect of allowing other conflicts (the Iran-Iraq War for
example) to transform the patterns of foreign policy in ways
favorable to Israel.

Asymmetries change over time. New generations of weaponry
may increase or decrease the quality of soldiers required to
operate them; prevailing modes of war may make particular kinds
of terrain more or less valuable, greater or lesser obstacles to
movement. The beginning of wisdom in most conflicts, however, is
the understanding that the two sides are very different in most
key respects, a realization captured in Thucydides' Peloponnesian
War, when the prudent Spartan King Archidamus lectures his
countrymen about their opponent:

In a struggle with a people who live in a distant land, who
have also an extraordinary familiarity with the sea, and who
are in the highest state of preparation in every other
department; with wealth private and public, with ships, and
horses, and heavy infantry, and a population such as no one
other Hellenic place can equal, and lastly a number of
tributary allies--what can justify us in rashly beginning
such a struggle? Wherein is our trust that we should rush
on it unprepared? Is it in our ships? There we are
inferior; while if we are to practise and become a match for
them, time must intervene. Is it in our money? There we
have a far greater deficiency. We neither have it in our

17


--- Page 21 ---
treasury, nor are we ready to contribute it from our private
funds. Confidence might possibly be felt in our superiority
in heavy infantry and population, which will enable us to
invade and devastate their lands. But the Athenians have
plenty of other land in their empire, and can import what
they want by sea. Again, if we are to attempt an
insurrection of their allies, these will have to be
supported with a fleet, most of them being islanders. What
then is to be our war?

The question, "What then is to be our war?" emerges from a study
of asymmetries at many different levels, understanding how
evanescent those asymmetries might be. At the time of the Munich
crisis in 1938, for example, the British and French seem not to
have understood that the Wehrmacht, and in particular the
Luftwaffe was a far more fragile organization than their own
armed forces, because of its rapid expansion.12 On the other
hand, the British campaign in Burma in 1945 revealed a superb
understanding of the differences between British Imperial and
Japanese forces, their styles of operation as well as their
structural composition.13

Scenarios

One of the most common analytical ruts is that of the
"canonical scenario," the base case which analysts study and
explore, but whose first assumptions they rarely question. In
the case of the NATO/Warsaw Pact balance there have been several,
distinguished by relative mobilization times (with, usually, a
three-day lag between the two pacts). In the United States
during the 1930s it was also a mobilization scenario, in which it
was assumed that the United States would commence full-scale war
preparedness at a given moment ("M-Day"). Most general staffs,
although they prepare a variety of contingency plans, have one
pet scenario for the outbreak of war, a view of the future with
which they feel most comfortable, and to which they devote most
of their attention. In 1914 general staffs had (or could have
had) more choices than they liked to admit, but they too suffered
from the tyranny of the "canonical scenario." Yet invariably,
wars never quite fit prewar images of them. Some allies do not
participate as fully as expected or at all; the enemy has
unexpected reservoirs of strength (for example, the German use of
reserve troops to bolster their front line in 1914); the war
begins with a surprise attack, or in a different geographical
area than expected.

It is a mistake to think that elaborate prewar planning can
cover all major scenarios for war--it cannot. But good net
assessment requires that a range of scenarios be considered.
Decisionmakers and planning staffs need to understand the variety
of wartime possibilities that they may encounter--if only to be

18


--- Page 22 ---
resilient enough to cope with an unexpected turn of events. A
crude form of such thinking was embodied in the American Rainbow
plans immediately before the US entry into World War II, and the
exercise was useful given the limited relevance of virtually all
prewar planning after December 1941.

Multi-scenario analysis, however, will not necessarily come
easily to analytical staffs, who may be more at home with combat
modeling and planning than with the political-military
speculation required to devise interesting cases. Moreover, some
of the assumptions to drive those scenarios (about the degree of
surprise suffered, or the cohesiveness of one's own coalition, or
the effectiveness of one's forces) may be controversial or
acutely unwelcome to established bureaucracies. Some of the most
important variables in the real world, however, are precisely
those. This in turn means that governmental net assessments must
often be closely held, not only for their classified information
content, but because of their political and bureaucratic
sensitivity.

19


--- Page 23 ---
Practical Problems of Net Assessment

Data

An office of net assessment will be not only a voracious
consumer of data, but a demanding, and sometimes even an
irritating one. In order to perform its task properly it needs
access to tightly held information about one's own forces, their
plans, readiness levels, and capabilities, which can be even
harder to obtain within the government than information about an
opponent. One's own armed forces may as a matter of principle be
quite unhappy about providing such information to a civilian
agency (as, I shall argue below, an office of net assessment
should be). They may see it as a competitor in conducting the
functions of a general staff, or as a potential supplier of
bureaucratic dynamite to organizational rivals.

Nor will the intelligence community, which generally sees
itself as providing information services to the rest of the
government, be all that much happier. The analytical culture of
net assessment is one of relentless skepticism, and hence such an
office will be asking questions that intelligence agencies are
often reluctant to answer, viz., "how do you know?" Moreover,
like detective Sergeant Joe Friday on the American television
show Dragnet, net assessors will often be asking for "just the
facts," and less in the way of interpretation or analysis. And
some of those requests for information may be of the kind not
routinely collected or maintained, such as long-term historical
data normalized for different counting rules or methods of
collection.

Often, net assessors will seek extremely fine-grained data
about both their own and the other side. A good example of the
use to which this can be put is the net assessment of US and
Soviet tank crews performed by the US Army in cooperation with
the OSD/Net Assessment in the late 1970s.14 A prolonged and
careful study revealed some disquieting facts about the relative
strengths and weaknesses of US and Soviet training. Although
American troops were three-year volunteers as opposed to the
Soviets' two-year conscripts, the average Soviet soldier was in
the same job for eighteen months versus six for the American.
The former had more frequent gunnery training, more extensive and
imaginative use of simulators, and better training for mine and
air warfare than his American counterpart. Thus, meticulous
research revealed that the simple picture the US Army had had of
the "otherness of the enemy" was at variance with the facts.

20


--- Page 24 ---
Supporting Studies

It should be noted that not all of the data most useful to
net assessors is highly classified. Indeed, large amounts may be
completely overt, and involve the kind of research usefully
commissioned from outside contractors or academics. A prominent
example in the American case is work on Soviet operational style
in war derived from a sifting of the vast overt Soviet literature
on such matters (the work by Nathan Leites, Chris Donnelly,
Phillip Petersen, John Hines, and Notra Trulock comes to mind).
Sometimes such work taps materials neglected by government
analysts, who may be so overcome by the wealth of information
collected from secret sources that they fail to probe as
adequately as they might the unclassified works available on the
outside.

There are two other cases in which an office of net
assessment may wish to draw on outside studies. One is for what
Samuel Huntington has called "policy-relevant basic research,"
particularly in history. Works such as Ernest May's Knowing
One's Enemies, a study of European and Japanese threat assessment
before the world wars, or the three-volume Military Effectiveness
studies edited by Allan Millett and Williamson Murray, are
particularly good examples of this kind of work. A second kind
of work may bear more directly on the problems faced by net
assessors: issues so murky that one wishes a second opinion, as
it were, from sources outside the intelligence community. Thus,
studies of the Soviet economy performed by emigre economists have
suggested--correctly, it would appear--that it is in far worse
shape than has been indicated by the computer models used by the
Central Intelligence Agency. Whereas CIA estimates had suggested
that the Soviet economy was roughly half that of the American,
emigre and dissident Soviet economists suggested that the true
figure was more like a third, or even less.15

The Organizational Design and Bureaucratic Politics of Net
Assessment

Good net assessment is, by and large, an organizational
product. While particular assessments require a single
supervisor, it is very hard to see how a single
researcher/analyst could produce a useful study completely on his
or her own. What are the characteristics of a net assessment
organization? First, it need not be large (say, more than a
dozen people) because it can tap external sources of analysis.
And indeed, like most research operations it will be most
productive if kept small. A mix of civilians and professional
officers would appear to be useful, and it is best if both have a
combination of operational experience and academic training in
various fields. Business degrees, PhDs in philosophy as well as

21


--- Page 25 ---
in electrical engineering--the more diverse the mix the better.
Intellectual eclecticism is the hallmark of good net assessment.

It is essential that the director (and desirable that his
deputy) be civilians, for three reasons. First, this ensures
continuity. In the American military system, at least, it is
virtually impossible to keep a serving officer in the same
position for more than two or three years, particularly if he is
talented and still on the rise. Like an academic institution,
which it resembles in some (though by no means all) respects, an
office of net assessment requires a mixture of longevity and
turnover in its members, and this is rarely possible in a purely
military environment. Secondly, it is essential that net
assessment retain a policymaking perspective, and that is
generally easier for a civilian than an officer, if only because
officers like to think of themselves as being apolitical
technical experts. Sound net assessment requires a willingness
to ask tough political questions, and although there are
exceptions, most officers do not feel comfortable doing so.
Thirdly, a civilian director is better suited to shield both such
an office and (to a lesser extent) its members from the
pernicious consequences of military hierarchy. This has an
external dimension--warding off attacks by senior officers
offended or upset by a particular analysis; and an internal one,
establishing a free-wheeling atmosphere in which rank is
immaterial to the basic work.

An office of net assessment must keep a low bureaucratic
profile. It will handle, obviously, extremely important
information, gathered from one's opponents as well as one's own
organizations. But just as importantly, its analyses will always
have the potential to become weapons in intra-organizational
struggles for budgets and missions. Thus, the core documents of
such an office should have extremely restricted distribution,
that is, they should be funnelled directly to senior defense
decisionmakers. On the other hand, the key concepts of net
assessment and the unclassified supporting studies that aid it
merit wide distribution, in furtherance of improved strategic
thinking across the board. In the final analysis, however, the
effectiveness of such an office rests not on its members but on
decisionmakers. If a Secretary of Defense is more interested in
day-to-day or budgetary affairs than in mid- and long-term
strategic planning, the studies produced by such an office will
have intellectual significance but no other. Although such an
office should attempt to "sell" its products to senior leaders,
it is not guaranteed success in so doing.

22


--- Page 26 ---
Future of Net Assessment

The Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization
Act of 1986 gave responsibility for net assessment, in part, to
the Joint Staff supporting the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In my view
this was a mistake, for reasons implicit in the arguments laid
out above. The military perspective has tended to be short term,
the military personnel system is unsuited to supporting such
long-term political-military research, and the inclination of
most military analysis organizations is, with notable and
praiseworthy exceptions, toward the formulaic and machine-driven
study, rather than the sort of work described above. In
addition, there is a danger that "net assessment" can become a
buzz word, a slogan to be hurled about in executive-congressional
debates about the defense budget, which will gradually be drained
of real meaning.

In the long term, a more serious problem is emerging from
the developments in world politics and the global distribution of
politial, economic, and military power. Net assessment was
difficult even when performed against an opponent as
intellectually and operationally conservative and stable as the
Soviet Union. Now, however, net assessment needs to be done in
new areas of the world, against newly emerging threats. And even
in performing US-Soviet net assessments, the old verities are no
longer assured. The cohesion of the Soviet empire has been
shattered, Soviet society itself is showing enormous strains only
guessed at a couple of years ago, and Soviet military doctrine is
in flux. A technological revolution is transforming the nature
of conventional warfare. Ironically, perhaps, just as the
American government was beginning to develop a really sound
understanding of its chief opponent, that opponent began to
change his nature in profound ways. Indeed, it is conceivable
that that opponent will self-destruct within a few years.

The battle for sound net assessment has been a struggle, in
some respects, for intellectual creativity and flexibility in a
line of work characterized by dogma and dangerous simplification.
Today, the United States faces a different kind of competition
with its old opponents, and new kinds of competition with other
states in different arenas, some political-military, some not.
In the new order, whatever its final shape, the task of net
assessment will lie less in beating back the unwarranted
certainty of over-eager modelers, than in the rendering of
coherence out of strategic chaos. That will prove an
intellectual and policymaking problem more difficult and
complicated than those with which it has been occupied hitherto.

23


--- Page 27 ---
Notes

1
Marshall's writing on the subject is sparse, but the
following three papers are of particular interest: "Problems of
Estimating Military Power," P-3417 (Santa Monica: RAND, 1966); "Α
Program to Improve Analytic Methods related to Strategic Forces,"
Policy Sciences, No. 15 (1982); "Arms Competitions: The Status of
Analysis," in Uwe Nerlich, ed., The Soviet Asset: Military Power
in the Competition Over Europe (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1983).

2
See Eliot A. Cohen, "Guessing Game: A Reappraisal of Systems
Analysis." In Samuel P. Huntington, ed., The Strategic
Imperative. Cambridge: Ballinger, 1982, pp. 163-191.

3
See, for example, the papers written by Churchill en route
to the ARCADIA conference in December 1941, shortly after
American entry into the war. Warren F. Kimball, ed., Churchill
and Roosevelt: The Complete Correspondence, Volume I, Alliance
Emerging (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984), pp.
294-308.

4
Something like this approach is advocated in James Q.
Wilson, Bureaucracy: What Government Agencies Do and Why They Do
It (New York: Basic Books, 1989), ix-xii.

5
I have been influenced here by a fascinating, unpublished
paper by James G. Roche and Barry D. Watts, "Choosing Analytic
Measures," November 18, 1989.

6
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, Michael Howard and Peter Paret,
trans., 2nd edition (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1982), p. 75. Note that this statement is found in the first
paragraph of the first chapter of the first book--which indicates
the importance Clausewitz assigned to this proposition.

7
See Graham Hall Turbiville, Jr., ed., The Voroshilov
Lectures: Materials from the Soviet General Staff Academy, Volume
I (Washington, D.C.: National Defense University Press, 1989),
pp. 55-92 ("Principles and Content of Military Strategy").

8
Frank C. Carlucci, Annual Report to the Congress of the
Secretary of Defense, Fiscal Year 1990 (Washington, D.C.: GPO,
1989), pp. 13-32.

9
See Wesley K. Wark, The Ultimate Enemy: British Intelligence
and Nazi Germany, 1933-1939 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
1985).

24


--- Page 28 ---
10 See Eliot A. Cohen, "Analysis" in Roy Godson, ed.,
Intelligence Requirements for the 1990s. Washington: National
Security Information Center, 1989, pp. 71-96.

11 See the discussion in Eliot A. Cohen and John Gooch,
Military Misfortunes: The Anatomy of Failure in War (New York:
The Free Press, 1990), pp 95-131.

12 See Williamson Murray, The Change in the European Balance of
Power, 1938-1939: The Path to Ruin (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1984), pp. 3-49.

13 See the discussion in William J. Slim, Defeat Into Victory
(1956; London: Macmillan, 1986), passim.

14 "Net Assessment of US and Soviet Tank Crew Training" (Fort
Monroe, Virginia: US Army Training and Doctrine Command, 1977).

15 These estimates were incorporated into Andrew W. Marshall,
et al., The Future Security Environment. Report of the Future
Security Environment Working Group to the Committee on Integrated
Long-Term Strategy (Washington, D.C.: Department of Defense,
1988) pp. 6-7, 92-95.


